---
title: What do you want to be in the future?
image: /uploads/blog/2017/2017-01-18-career/image.jpg
preview: /uploads/blog/2017/2017-01-18-career/preview.jpg
---

The worst question you can ask a 10-year old is, "what do you want to be in the future?". I know there's no such thing as a terrible question, but it's this sort that always made me feel so anxious. It's terrible because you're put on the spot as a kid trying to come with an answer you feel like you should already know— but you don't know and it's kind of scary in a way.

## Ten Years Ago

Ten-year-old me never really knew what he wanted to be. Back then, I remember trying to answer that question in front of my parents teachers and relatives I've never met. The best I could come up with was a shrug, shy smile, and a spattering of cool-sounding job titles from my favorite films and TV shows. I'd then walk away— hoping never to be asked that same question again.

However, ten-year-old me knew what he was interested in at the time. Science— moreso, the engineering and technology aspect of it. I remember afternoons spent watching _Newton's Apple_, a show that carried science experiments in exciting and creative ways. I also remember that I'd then try to carry out the same experiments myself, building them with Lego or things I could find around the kitchen. I enjoyed science because it was the perfect mix of curiosity and creativity. So— ten-year-old me _did_ have an answer to that terrible question— or did he?

@[A short clip about quicksand from _Newton's Apple_.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AY1lHxajBv8)

Ten-year-old me never wanted to become a scientist. I couldn't see myself working in a lab, or wearing a lab coat for that matter. Instead, I saw myself using science to make and build things. But back then, I didn't know the exact job title for that— and to this day ten years later— I still don't.

## Ten Years Later

To be asked the same question today, "what do you want to be in the future?"— I still feel nervous giving a reply. Even though I'm half-way done with my Computer Science degree and becoming more prominent in the tech industry, I still don't know what my job will be. I still reply with a shrug, a shy smile, and a spattering of cool-sounding job titles from my favorite films and TV shows.

But I know what I want to be doing in my career. John Maeda, a computational designer wrote a haiku that best describes it:

> All I want to be <br/>
> Is a person who makes things <br/>
> And thinks about them.

So if that makes me a designer, a technologist, a scientist, a software engineer or even a _multidisciplinary artist_ then that's the answer I'm going for. But I want to be a person who builds products that help people live better lives. I want to design solutions to solve the world's global challenges. I want to immerse myself in craft and show other people how do to the same. I want to use aspects of aspects of science— curiousity, experimentation, organised theory and excitement— to make things that push the human race forward.
